=head1 NAME

Perl::LanguageServer - Language Server and Debug Protocol Adapter for Perl

=head1 VERSION

Version 2.3.0


=cut

=head1 SYNOPSIS

This is a Language Server and Debug Protocol Adapter for Perl

It implements the Language Server Protocol which provides
syntax-checking, symbol search, etc. Perl to various editors, for
example Visual Studio Code or Atom.

L<https://microsoft.github.io/language-server-protocol/specification>

It also implements the Debug Adapter Protocol, which allow debugging
with various editors/includes

L<https://microsoft.github.io/debug-adapter-protocol/overview>

Should work with any Editor/IDE that support the Language-Server-Protocol.

To use both with Visual Studio Code, install the extension "perl"

Any comments and patches are welcome.

=head2 Features

=over 4

=item * Language Server

=over 4

=item * Syntax checking

=item * Symbols in file

=item * Symbols in workspace/directory

=item * Goto Definition

=item * Find References

=item * Call Signatures

=item * Supports multiple workspace folders

=item * Document and selection formatting via perltidy

=item * Run on remote system via ssh

=back

=item * Debugger

=over 4

=item * Run, pause, step, next, return

=item * Support for coro threads

=item * Breakpoints 

=item * Conditional breakpoints

=item * Breakpoints can be set while program runs and for modules not yet loaded

=item * Variable view, can switch to every stack frame or coro thread

=item * Set variable

=item * Watch variable

=item * Tooltips with variable values

=item * Evaluate perl code in debuggee, in context of every stack frame of coro thread

=item * Automatically reload changed Perl modules while debugging

=item * Debug multiple perl programs at once

=item * Run on remote system via ssh

=back

=back


=cut

=pod



=head1 AUTHOR

grichter, C<< <richter at ecos.de> >>

=head1 BUGS

Please report any bugs or feature requests to C<bug-perl-languageserver at rt.cpan.org>, or through
the web interface at L<http://rt.cpan.org/NoAuth/ReportBug.html?Queue=Perl-LanguageServer>.  I will be notified, and then you'll
automatically be notified of progress on your bug as I make changes.




=head1 SUPPORT

You can find documentation for this module with the perldoc command.

    perldoc Perl::LanguageServer

Presentation on German Perl Workshop 2020:

L<https://github.com/richterger/Perl-LanguageServer/blob/master/docs/Perl-LanguageServer%20und%20Debugger%20f%C3%BCr%20Visual%20Studio%20Code%20u.a.%20Editoren%20-%20Perl%20Workshop%202020.pdf>


You can also look for information at:

=over 4

=item * Github:
 L<https://github.com/richterger/Perl-LanguageServer>

=item * CPAN Ratings

L<http://cpanratings.perl.org/d/Perl-LanguageServer>

=item * MetaCPAN

L<https://metacpan.org/release/Perl-LanguageServer>

=back

For reporting bugs please use GitHub issues.


=head1 ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS


=head1 LICENSE AND COPYRIGHT

Copyright 2018-2021 grichter.

This program is free software; you can redistribute it and/or modify it
under the terms of the the Artistic License (2.0). You may obtain a
copy of the full license at:

L<http://www.perlfoundation.org/artistic_license_2_0>

Any use, modification, and distribution of the Standard or Modified
Versions is governed by this Artistic License. By using, modifying or
distributing the Package, you accept this license. Do not use, modify,
or distribute the Package, if you do not accept this license.

If your Modified Version has been derived from a Modified Version made
by someone other than you, you are nevertheless required to ensure that
your Modified Version complies with the requirements of this license.

This license does not grant you the right to use any trademark, service
mark, tradename, or logo of the Copyright Holder.

This license includes the non-exclusive, worldwide, free-of-charge
patent license to make, have made, use, offer to sell, sell, import and
otherwise transfer the Package with respect to any patent claims
licensable by the Copyright Holder that are necessarily infringed by the
Package. If you institute patent litigation (including a cross-claim or
counterclaim) against any party alleging that the Package constitutes
direct or contributory patent infringement, then this Artistic License
to you shall terminate on the date that such litigation is filed.

Disclaimer of Warranty: THE PACKAGE IS PROVIDED BY THE COPYRIGHT HOLDER
AND CONTRIBUTORS "AS IS' AND WITHOUT ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES.
THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY, FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR
PURPOSE, OR NON-INFRINGEMENT ARE DISCLAIMED TO THE EXTENT PERMITTED BY
YOUR LOCAL LAW. UNLESS REQUIRED BY LAW, NO COPYRIGHT HOLDER OR
CONTRIBUTOR WILL BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, OR
CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THE PACKAGE,
EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.



=cut

